An Economics Nobel for Showing How Much Women Matter
Technological progress is a key source of economic growth, but its effects aren’t always fully captured by its effects on gross domestic product. Sometimes a new technology changes everything — the way we work, the way we live, the way we relate to one another in society.

Consider, for example, the effects of the birth control pill.

If it never occurred to you that modern birth control was a transformative technology, or more broadly that expanding women’s ability to choose had profound economic as well as social effects, you have plenty of company. There have been innumerable books and articles about the economic impacts of, for example, globalization and information technology.

But in 2002, when Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz published an article titled “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions,” they were entering a sparsely populated field.

On Monday, Goldin, a professor at Harvard, received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in recognition of her role in advancing our understanding of women’s labor market outcomes. It was a richly deserved honor.

In fact, if you ask me, the Nobel announcement sold Goldin a bit short by failing to note her hugely important contributions beyond the issue of women’s work. In particular, it didn’t mention her work on inequality more broadly, notably her role in documenting the sudden and drastic decline in inequality that took place in the 1940s, creating the middle-class society I grew up in (which has now been destroyed).

Which is not to say that women’s work is a minor issue. It’s an immensely important subject, one whose study Goldin pioneered.

Put it this way: For most of the 1960s, American women in their prime working years were less than half as likely as men to be part of the paid labor force; by 2000 three-quarters of the gender gap in labor force participation had been eliminated.

This represented a large increase in the economy’s labor supply, and hence in potential G.D.P.; my back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that the impact of rising female employment on economic growth was comparable to, say, the effects of globalization.

But the effect on G.D.P. was only part of the story.

In 2006 Goldin published an extraordinary panoramic overview of the history of women at work in America. As she documented, the percentage of women in the paid labor force rose steadily from around 1930 to 1970, a rise Goldin attributed to the combination of the economy’s shift away from manual labor toward clerical work and a rise in female education, along with the diffusion of household technologies like refrigerators and washing machines that freed more married women to work outside the home.